# test4lol

## Research / Theory

### The Tech Coup: How to Save Democracy From Silicon Valley (Marietje Schaake)

- Primary argument is that technology companies are increasingly outside of the control of governance. 
- Technology companies are rapidly moving into spheres of what was previously public good provision. This includes major cables and connects; starlink internet; etc.
- For AI/LLMs, technology companies are making enormous investments. This creates an incentive to recoup investments through future capture of value.
- Publicly funding AI models and other major platforms for public, 'fair' use is crucial.
	- The US is unlikely to do this, but the EU may.
	- Social media is inherently monopolistic. However, these new models do not have strong network effects.
	- The 'marginal cost' of production is quite low.
- Technology regulations can force immense shifts due to the incentives for these companies to not create different versions of the same software.
- Technology companies are adversarial towards regulation and governance, often flouting or evading rules. Uber is the most prominent example, but it is widespread.

#### Techno-optimism is only one side of the coin

- Technology is *effect agnostic*. Techno-optimism has become common since the dotcom boom and again during social media's early impact on social revolutions. However, technology can be used to centralize power and reduce the quality of people's lives. This point rhymes with @Acemoglu_2023_PowerProgressOur and [Vitalik Buterin's concern about AI being used to expand the capacity of highly centralized regimes](https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2023/11/27/techno_optimism.html#emperor). Even worse, AI does not have agency, meaning there is no 'Human in the Loop (AI)'. 
	- The sky is near, the emperor is everywhere. Vitalik Buterin uses a play on the Chinese proverb `"天高皇帝远 ("tian gao huang di yuan"), "the sky is high, the emperor is far away."` AI can massively increase the capacity of centralized states to exert control through semi-autonomous agents. **What does counter-play (agency promoting AI uses) look like**?

#### Expertise asymmetry

- Silicon valley understands and can explore uses of AI much more effectively than the masses or political representatives can foresee their uses.
	- This is a fundamental difference from decentralized protocols (email, rss, ssh) or social media (use cases generated by the users in a public 'sandbox'). 

### "*The Most Important Scarce Resource is Legitimacy*" Legitimacy as social norms

- Vitalik Buterin summarizes the scarcity and value of legitimacy as a social technology. 
- In decentralized coordination games, legitimacy is often king/queen. He (as may be expected) provides examples from crypto, where central actors attempt to defect (i.e. Justin Sun buying Steem as a company to capture STEEM the crypto-coin). In these cases, the legitimacy of the token itself was destroyed, so the community re-built a clone token minus the defecting actors, restoring legitimacy. 
	- This can be seen by the enormous, multi-millon USD outlays *daily* by both ETH and BTC to ensure security and trustworthiness. This is far more than efficient, unless we assume that (aspirationally) iron-clad legitimacy is itself incredibly valuable.
- Legitimacy here is nearly (or exactly?) synonymous with what [@Bicchieri_2006_GrammarSocietyNature; @Bicchieri_2016_NormsWildHow] terms 'social norms', being composed of both descriptive and injunctive norms. Vitalik notes that legitimacy has to do with second-order expectations about how all *others* in a coordination game will act. 
- A useful breakdown of the *paths* to legitimacy follows (below quoted):
	- "Legitimacy by **brute** force: someone convinces everyone that they are powerful enough to impose their will and resisting them will be very hard. This drives most people to submit because each person expects that everyone else will be too scared to resist as well.
	- Legitimacy by **continuity**: if something was legitimate at time T, it is by default legitimate at time T+1.
	- Legitimacy by **fairness**: something can become legitimate because it satisfies an intuitive notion of fairness. See also: my post on credible neutrality, though note that this is not the only kind of fairness.
	- Legitimacy by process: if a process is legitimate, the outputs of that process gain legitimacy (eg. laws passed by democracies are **sometimes** described in this way).
	- Legitimacy by performance: if the outputs of a process lead to results that satisfy people, then that process can gain legitimacy (eg. successful dictatorships are sometimes described in this way).
	- Legitimacy by **participation**: if people participate in choosing an outcome, they are more likely to consider it legitimate. This is similar to fairness, but not quite: it rests on a psychological desire to be consistent with your previous actions."  
	
### Funding has pernicious effects on movements

- [Marshall Ganz](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aAWSjyMI9Kc) argues that funding has robbed movements of their ability to attract a constituency. 
	- Funding end-runs the requirement to build organizing capacity. 
	- Mobilizing large groups of people, assuming money, is not difficult. However, this is not through the *organizations* capacity, and it is fundamentally not relational.
	- Ganz views civil society as at a nadir point in US history. 
	- Civil society has become dependent on *donor* funding, rather than *organizing the public*
	- Note: The ability of one-to-many technology (social media) in mobilizing networks without organizational infrastructure or infrastructure may be driving this. Is civil society falling to [McLuhan's law](https://substack.com/home/post/p-160008408?utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web) (medium is the message). 


## Tooling
### Quick python syntax review

#### Looping
- python can implement looping in many ways:  

```python